---
id: 10
state: accepted
created: 2026-07-16
updated: 2026-07-16
supersedes:
superseded-by:
domains:
  - all
---

# ADR-0010: Resource-oriented design

## Context
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119).

Inspired by [Google's AIP-121](https://google.aip.dev/121), this ADR outlines the principles of resource-oriented design for our API.

We were already following some of these principles, but this ADR formalizes them and provides a reference for future development.

In resource-oriented design (ROD) (or resource-oriented architecture — ROA), the API is structured around resources, which are the primary entities that the API exposes. Each resource has a unique identifier and supports a set of standard operations (such as Get, List, Create, Update, Delete).

### Operations
Each resource should implement the following standard operations:

- `Get`: Retrieve a single resource by its unique identifier.
- `List`: Retrieve a collection of resources, optionally filtered, sorted, and paginated.
- `Create`: Create a new resource.
- `Update`: Update an existing resource.
- `Delete`: Delete an existing resource.

Same resource may define batch operations for `Get`, `Create`, `Update`, and `Delete`, which allow clients to perform these operations on multiple entities in a single request.

RPC method and HTTP verb mapping:

| RPC Method | HTTP Verb |
|------------|-----------|
| Get        | GET       |
| List       | GET       |
| Create     | POST      |
| Update     | PATCH     |
| Delete     | DELETE    |

`Update` operations must use the `PATCH` verb.

### Resource Identifiers
Every resource must have a unique identifier, which is used to retrieve, update, or delete the resource. The identifier should be a string that is unique within the context of the resource type.

### Request and Response Format
Request (Input) and response (Output) payloads must be validated.

Validations must be performed with a schema validation library that supports [Standard Schema](https://standardschema.dev/).

Input and output validators must be defined for each operation in the resource contract.

### Pagination
Pagination should be supported for `List` operations. Operation may support either offset-based or cursor-based pagination. Operation must describe the pagination method used in its contract and must add pagination metadata to the output payload.

If the upper limit of the number of items in a collection is known (for example a `list` can hold at most `256` items) and/or navigating to an arbitrary page is a nice to have feature for UX, then offset-based pagination should be preferred. Otherwise, cursor-based pagination should be preferred.

Cursors must be opaque and URL safe.

### Ordering
`List` operations may support ordering of the results based on one or more fields.

If they support, the ordering criteria should be specified in the input payload.

The output list order should be based on the field type's natural comparator e.g., numerics ordered numerically, strings ordered lexicographically, timestamps ordered chronologically, etc.

### Filtering
`List` operations may support filtering of the results based on one or more fields.

If they support, the filtering criteria should be specified in the input payload.

### Errors
API must return appropriate error codes and messages for invalid requests, failed operations, and other exceptional conditions.

Returned error must be of type `ORPCError` (except for `auth` errors, which must be of type `AuthError`).

### Date and Time
All timestamps must be stored as UTC.

Conversion to other timezones is the responsibility of the client.

Resources should define the `createdAt` and `updatedAt` fields, which are automatically set by the API when a resource is created or updated.

Resources may define `deletedAt` field, which is automatically set by the API when a resource is soft-deleted. These records then should be filtered out from the `Get` and `List` operations by default.

Resources may define `expiresAt` field. Resources that have an expiration date must be scanned periodically and should be deleted (or soft-deleted) or archived when they expire. API must not allow requests that create or update resources with an expiration date in the past.

Resources may define other timestamp fields as needed.

Resources may define fields that represent time ranges (such as `start` and `end` fields). These fields must be represented as a half-open interval `[start, end)`.

### Standardized Codes

**Content type**: Must use [IANA media types](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml) and should be called `mime_type`.

**Countries and regions**: Country and region codes must follow ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 and ISO 3166-2 standards as indicated in [ADR-0008](./0008.md). For a complete list of country and region codes, refer to the [Unicode CLDR](https://cldr.unicode.org/) and [CLDR Territory Information](https://www.unicode.org/cldr/charts/46/supplemental/territory_information.html).

**Currency**: Must use [ISO-4217 currency codes](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_4217).

**Language**: Must use [BCP-47 language codes](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/bcp/bcp47.txt).

**Timezone**: Must use [IANA timezone database](https://www.iana.org/time-zones).

### Partial Responses
Operations may support partial responses, which allow clients to request only a subset of the fields in the response payload. This can reduce the amount of data transferred over the network and improve performance.

Operations may define either a field mask or a view.

A field mask is a list of fields that the client wants to include in the response. The server will only return the specified fields in the response payload.

A view is a predefined set of fields that the server will return in the response payload. The client can request a specific view by specifying its name in the request.

### File and Directory Structure
Any code that can be run must be put under the `apps` directory.

Any code that is not directly runnable and is meant to be used as a library must be put under the `packages` directory.

Files should follow the kebab-case naming convention.

### Documentation
Documentation files should be written in Markdown format. You may use supplementary formats if necessary, but Markdown should be the primary format for documentation.

Documentation files must be placed under the `docs` directory, except for the `README.md` files, which should be placed in the root of each package or application.

All ADR files must be placed under the `docs/adr` directory.

Inline code documentation must be written in [CommonMark](https://commonmark.org/) format.

## Decision
All new code should adhere to the principles of resource-oriented design as outlined in this ADR. Existing code should be refactored to follow these principles where feasible.

## Consequences
- Positive:
	- Better API design and consistency.

## Further reading
- https://google.aip.dev/121
- https://docs.cloud.google.com/apis/design
- https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/architecture/best-practices/api-design

## Related ADRs

- [ADR-0008](./0008.md): New Category, City, And Place Schemas

## Changelog

- **2026-07-20**: Fixed typos.
- **2026-07-16**: Created
