# Wanderlust - API

## Prerequisites

- Bun
- Docker
- ngrok (https://dashboard.ngrok.com/get-started/setup)

## Environment Variables

Either setup manually or use Dotenv Vault (preferred).

### Setup Dotenv Vault

- Preferred way to manage environment variables.
- See the Dotenv Vault Docs here: https://www.dotenv.org/docs/quickstart/sync
- Login to your account.
- Use `env:pull` and `env:push` scripts in `package.json` to manage secrets.

### Manual Environment Variables Setup

- Create `.env` file in the root API directory.
- Copy from `.env.example` to `.env` file.
- Fill out the empty values.
- Defaults for some keys for the development environment can be found in `src/env.ts`.
- Other keys must be obtain from services or generated.
  - Get Clerk secrets: https://dashboard.clerk.com/

## Run Development Server

- Start Docker containers: `docker compose up`
- Start the API server: `bun dev`
- Start ngrok: `bun ngrok`

## Getting Long Lived Token for API Development Testing

- Open Web App.
- Sign in as any user.
- Open DevTools Console.
- Get the token with this command: `window.Clerk.session.getToken({ template: "api-testing-token-template" }).then((data) => { console.table(data) })`
- Token lives for 24 hours.
- Send the token in headers: `Authorization: Bearer YOUR_TOKEN`

## Ports

- API server: `localhost:5000`
- Postgres: `localhost:5432`
- Redis: `6379`
- MinIO: `localhost:9000` and `localhost:9001` (Web UI)
- Ngrok Web UI: `localhost:4040`
- Typesense: `localhost:8108`
- Typesense Dashboard: `localhost:3006`
- RabbitMQ Management: `localhost:15672`

## Tech Stack

- `Bun`: JS/TS runtime
- `Hono`: Web server
- `Docker`: Running containers + defining services (Docker Compose)
- `Clerk`: Authentication service
- `Drizzle`: ORM
- `Postgres`: Database
- `Redis` and `ioredis`: Caching
- `Zod`: Schema validation
- `MinIO`: S3 compatible file storage
- `Svix`: Web hooks
- `Typesense`: Search engine
- `Envalid`: Environment configuration and validation
- `ngrok`: Opening local webserver to internet (reverse proxy)

## Scripts

- `dev`: Runs the development server with hot module reload.
- `clerk-sync`: Synchronizes local database instance with Clerk.
- `generate`: Generates Drizzle migrations.
- `ngrok`: Runs the Ngrok server for local webhooks testing.
- `env:pull`: Gets environment variables from Dotenv Vault.
- `env:push:`: Pushes current `.env` file to Dotenv Vault.
- `studio`: Starts Drizzle Kit Studio
- `type-check`: Runs `tsc` without emitting files to type check.
- `migrate`: Runs Drizzle migrations created by the `generate` script.
- `addresses`: Gets country, state, and city information from CSV files and inserts to database.
- `fake`: Generates fake data and writes to `scripts/data` folder.
- `seed`: Uses fake data generated by the `fake` script and sends HTTP requests to server with that data.
